Tangerang (Sundanese: ᮒᮍᮨᮛᮀ, Indonesian pronunciation: [taˈŋəɾaŋ]) is a city in the province of Banten, Indonesia. Located on the western border of Jakarta, it is the third largest urban centre in the Greater Jakarta metropolitan area after Jakarta and Bekasi; the sixth largest city proper in the nation; and the largest city in Banten province. It has an area of 164.55 square kilometres (63.53 square miles) and an official 2010 Census population of 1,798,601, which had risen to 1,895,486 at the 2020 Census. – making it the eighth most populated suburb in the world at the latter date; the official estimate as at mid 2021 was 1,911,914. It has not only functioned as a dormitory city, as there are many industrial areas such as Jatake, and several business districts, including CBD Alam Sutera in the area. Located just next to Jakarta on the west with many road access and improved infrastructure, such as new toll road, it is one of the favorite location for property seekers and investors in the Bodetabek area.Tangerang, along with the neighbouring South Tangerang, is where many large-scale developers have created built-up areas such as BSD City, Gading Serpong, Alam Sutera, and Lippo Village, and now becoming the area's center of economy, business, commerce, and education.
Tangerang is also home for Soekarno–Hatta International Airport which serves the Jakarta metropolitan area and is Indonesia's main gateway. The city is an industrial and manufacturing hub on Java and is home to over 1,000 factories. Many international corporations have plants in the city. Tangerang tends to be hot and humid, with little in the way of trees or geographical features. Certain areas consist of swamps, including the areas near the Soekarno–Hatta International Airport. It's also home to Indonesia Convention Exhibition (ICE) BSD City, Indonesia's largest convention and exhibition center located in BSD City.
In recent years the urban expansion of Jakarta has covered Tangerang. As the result, many of its residents commute to Jakarta for work or vice versa. Many high-class and middle-class satellite cities have been developed in Tangerang, complete with their own shopping malls, private schools and convenience centers. The government is working on expanding the toll road system to accommodate more traffic flow to and from the area.
Tangerang is the corporations' alternative to move or build their offices from Jakarta due to the heavy traffic and crowds, such as Unilever Indonesia, Kino Group, and Alfa Group.

